# Ethos

This is more for me as I write the system. I spelled out in the introduction the feelings from the players I want to evoke. Here are the core design ethos that are important to make me feel that those goals have been met.

- Magic needs to feel magical
	- This is a hard one to explain precisely. Magic, historically, was used by humans to refer to things that they did not understand. Once you understand something, it ceases to be magical and becomes scientific. There is nothing inherently wrong with this, but 5e is a pretty scientific magical world and that niche is already filled. Doing a non scientific magical system is much tougher because we live in a world where the natural phenomena were explained through us using science (at least for me). It is hard to break out of this mentality and make magic more than just rainbow guns. There are a few methods I think will help with this goal
		- Remove magic from the players direct control.
			- If a player comes in with a level 1 character that has the innate ability to charm / sleep / burn people, this has a major impact on how the world would work. It is hard for us to fully understand the difference this simple things would make, and entire superhero comics were often written around a spell or two (web + jump = spiderman)
			- Putting the magic in the hands of the artifacts allows for a more natural roleplaying experience for most modern humans (at least in the US). I don't know how to roleplay someone who literal has a strong enough connection with a god that I can warp the fabric of reality. Most players I find tend to just abstract this away and play a normal personality who happens to have this ability and has a stronger conviction in their philosophies and cites their deity when defending these beliefs. I think putting these abilities in an artifact that the player will unlock power from over time provides a much better narrative angle for the player. I don't know what it's like to have learned how to turn people invisible. I can imagine what it's like to find a ring that turns me invisible, that's Bilbo. Add that the ring is corrupting you and that's a great tension for a story. I can understand how an artifact is powerful as this ties into the human experience of us using better and better tools. This turns magic more into "technology", but the esoteric nature of the artifacts and the curiosity / fear / anger it might incur from using it in civilization are ways that you can contribute to the magical feeling.
			- You can have these artifacts be more common, but the assumption of the system is that they are quite rare and non standard. There is only 1 Necronomicon.
				- The more prevalent you make these artifacts, the more that you will want to account for how these artifacts will shape your world. I try to limit these because it allows me to write each session / adventure more freely, without the concern that I am going to contradict myself and lead to an unsatisfying game.
				- I believe contradictions lead to an unsatisfying game because it destroys the players ability to have confidence in their more complex plans playing out in a "fair" way. For example: 
					- Say there is easy magical communication in this system (there isn't) and you as a Referee forget that when planning your next session. You write a cool scenario involving a messenger pigeon from the kings guard getting stolen and hunt to track down the stolen plans. One of the players remarks "Hmm I wonder why they didn't just use magic here? We should look into that. Maybe a powerful wizard is after them and they were afraid of scrying magic." Now you're in a bit of a pickle. The player is using reasonable logic to determine a culprit that they shoot start to hunt. But their logic is wrong because you failed to account for a magical ability the kings guard would have access to in world. There are definitely ways to write yourself out of this hole if you find yourself in it, this is a toy example, but I make it to prove the point that the more magical abilities you make commonly accessible, the more likely it is you will write yourself into a contradiction when playing. I think this sort of thing should be left to a setting document as opposed to a system document, and artifacts provide an easily understandable way to do this. It let's the person running the world decide what magic they want to have rather than the setting imposing 
- Common abilities affect the world
	- If an ability that does not exist in our real life world exists in the system, then the worlds in that system are affected by it. This means that you should not create a system with sending magic as a commonly known spell unless magical texting is a common part of the world.