### A Note About Racism
The history of race in RPGs is undeniably intertwined with our real world's history of racism. I believe it's important to acknowledge this fact before detailing this system any further. I choose the term ancestry because it reads much nicer and detached from the terrible history that the word 'race' has, but it is undeniably related. That being said, I made the system with this in mind.

The ancestries in my setting are all united by one thing. They each have a mortal soul, equal and priceless. I am writing the game I would want to play. I don't like tying ability scores to ancestry because the idea that some are just naturally smarter, while others are naturally stronger has some serious baggage to it that I cannot get past. There are unique abilities you can give ancestries that make gameplay fun, are interesting, and don't reinforce this pseudo-'naturalism' of racism. Different but similar, I don't want men in RPGs to have higher strength "because they tend to have more testosterone", it's just reinforcing the pseudo-'naturalism' of sexism. If you feel differently, I suggest the book "Who's Afraid of Gender" by Judith Butler, and other philosophical books on race and gender. I don't intend to engage in spectacle debate with anyone on this. If this makes you not want to play this system I hope you consider changing your beliefs on these topics. Now, I don't believe whether or not certain people deserve rights and fair treatment is an "argument" I need to lend the legitimacy of debate. That is why I suggest books. If you are truly interested in exploring these ideas and having an open mind, then I encourage you to engage in way more akin to scientific debate. Read the literature on the topic, read the literature's sources on the topic and do some critical thinking. I'm never going to "change your mind" in an email or forum thread spectacle.

As a Jewish person it is frankly frightening to see when parts of the TTRPG community make "Woke Company" threads complaining about inclusive representation in medieval inspired settings because "they are progressively removing white people". It's a little too close to the Nazi propaganda piece "Are the white people dying" for my tastes. Nowadays they usually blame it on black people, women, and queer people as opposed to Jews. 'First they came for the communists... and I spoke up immediately because I read the rest of the f-ing poem'. If your idea of fun pastime is roleplaying white men in a white male ruled European medieval world where women are second class citizens and other races are effectively removed from the public sphere, then I don't think you're the type of person I want to associate with.

With that out of the way, I do like to react to ancestry in the game in some way. I think Baldur's Gate 3 had a very tactful handling of race. They had many cases (Tiefling refugees, Duergar and Drow and Deep Gnome slaves) with lots of conflict, but they don't say 'get out of here you dang dirty grey skin'. There is suspicion, the gnomes discuss their enslavement by the drow, and the drow discuss their 'right' to authority. The most directly "racist" characters are the Githyanki, and the acting is played so campy and over the top most of the time it's hard to take it too seriously.

My modus operandi is I react to ancestry / race as part of a system, so long as it follows this structural kind of reactivity, and is clearly bad. I think that once you get into roleplaying characters actually being directly derogatory about ancestry, especially appearance (especially especially if it's related to their coloration) then things get *real* over the line *real* fast. I believe it is totally unnecessary. I have found that a focus on cultural and structural issues is both respectful and engaging. The PCs engage with narrative conflict ideas like "why is the world this way?" and "do we want to change it?" in a natural way without awkward / triggering roleplay. 

Also, if you don't want to run a political intrigue campaign like BG3 does with one of chosen being the political fearmonger Gortash, you can basically ignore ancestry since it doesn't impact the average interaction. 

Regardless, setting expectations around how race / ancestry is treated in the setting is an important part of session 0 to make sure everyone is respecting one another.

As always this is just the default setting. Feel free to tinker with it to suit your taste.